SESSION 6 – HANDS-ON EXERCISE
PARTICLE SYSTEMS

GOAL

Learn how to create many moving elements using objects and ArrayLists.

You will build a simple particle system where small particles appear at the mouse position, move with random velocities, and gradually fade away.

Particle systems are commonly used to simulate effects like smoke, sparks, rain, or dust.

STEP 1 – RUN THE BASE SYSTEM

Create a new Processing sketch.

Paste the starter code provided.

Run the sketch.

Move your mouse around the screen.

Observe the result.

Think about:

Where do particles appear?

How do the particles move?

What happens to them over time?

Why don’t particles stay on the screen forever?

STEP 2 – UNDERSTAND THE STRUCTURE

Locate in the code:

The Particle class

The ArrayList that stores all particles

The constructor that creates a new particle

The update() method that moves the particle

The display() method that draws the particle

The isDead() method that checks when particles disappear

Also find where a new particle is created:

particles.add(new Particle(mouseX, mouseY));

Notice how many particle objects are created over time.

STEP 3 – MODIFY THE SYSTEM

Change at least THREE of the following:

Increase or decrease particle size

Change the speed of particles

Change how quickly particles fade

Change the color of particles

Make particles bigger or smaller

Make particles move mostly upward

Make particles fall like rain

Change the background color

Observe how small changes affect the visual behaviour.

STEP 4 – ADD VARIATION (OPTIONAL)

Try adding new behaviour to the particles.

Ideas:

Give particles random colors

Add gravity so particles fall downward

Make particles grow or shrink

Add mouse interaction (particles burst when clicked)

Change particle shape from ellipse() to rect()

Make particles leave trails by removing background()

STEP 5 – PUSH IT FURTHER (ADVANCED)

If you finish early:

Create multiple particle sources

Make particles spawn in bursts

Use noise() instead of random movement

Add a wind effect

Create a particle brush that draws as you move the mouse

Try turning your particle system into a dynamic visual effect.

Examples:

smoke

fireworks

glowing dust

falling snow

abstract motion trails

REFLECTION

Before finishing, ask yourself:

What does each particle object store?

How are many particles managed at once?

Why do we use an ArrayList instead of a normal array?

What happens when particles are removed from the system?

Particle systems allow complex visuals to emerge from many simple objects following simple rules.